---
layout: post
title:  "Day 3 // FS"
date:   2014-10-01 23:44:03
categories: flatironschool, ruby, git
tags: regexp, arrays, methods, class, matz, yukihiro mastumoto
---
### Biggest Problem of the Day (BPD): Format a phone number

Task: build a method that takes a string argument and outputs the digits in the form: (XXX) XXX-XXXX.

I'm embarrassed about this one. I don't even want to show my code but in the spirit of learning, this is what I originally started with:

{% highlight ruby %}
def normalize_phone_number(number)
	#test = number.split("").each { |d| return "Please enter digits only" if d.class != Fixnum 
	digits = (0..9).to_a
	phone_number = []
	string_array = number.split("")
	string_array.map! do |i|
		digits.each do |d|
			if d.to_s == i
				phone_number << d
			end
		end
	end
	return number if phone_number.length != 10
	"(#{phone_number[0]}#{phone_number[1]}#{phone_number[2]}) " 
	"#{phone_number[3]}#{phone_number[4]}#{phone_number[5]}-" +
	"#{phone_number[6]}#{phone_number[7]}#{phone_number[8]}#{phone_number[9]}"
	
end
{% endhighlight %}

I must have committed this code out of haste. It even had the commented `#test`at the beginning. I mean I was stuck and just happy to finally get it work (and pass all the specs). It felt like I was racking my brain for an hour trying to come up with a working solution. 

At first, I thought, "Hm, maybe I can split the string and check each whether or not `each_char.class == Fixnum`". It took me a minute (a few, actually) to realize calling `.class` on the char was not going to return Fixnum... they're all strings!

Then I thought, well, what if I split each char and convert it to an int? Then I can compare it to an array of acceptable ints [0,1,..,9] and shovel them into a phone_number array. But that wasn't going to work either because any letters or symbols (i.e. parentheses) originally passed in as the argument would be converted to 0 and that would sneak through my conditional.

Eventually I settled on creating an array of digits, converting them to strings and comparing them to each char within the argument. If they were equal, I pushed them to a new array and used each index to build the formatted phone number.

Here's the kicker: at the bottom of the lab, there were suggested resources, that I had skipped, that mentioned regexps. It was only after I finished the problem that I noticed, and I kicked myself plenty over it. Regexps make it so simple!

I made a few changes and bam; same functionality; cleaner code.

{% highlight ruby %}
def normalize_phone_number(number)
	number.each_char do |i|
		if i =~ /[0-9]/
			phone_number << i
		end
 	end

 	return number if phone_number.length != 10
 	"(#{phone_number[0]}#{phone_number[1]}#{phone_number[2]}) " 
 	"#{phone_number[3]}#{phone_number[4]}#{phone_number[5]}-" +
 	"#{phone_number[6]}#{phone_number[7]}#{phone_number[8]}#{phone_number[9]}"
end
{% endhighlight %}

### Rest of the day
As you can tell, we finally started working with Ruby today. We started the day with a lecture on Ruby, going through it's history with [Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yukihiro_Matsumoto) and his philosophy on the language's mission. Essentially, Ruby was built for programmer happiness. Where in some languages you are forced to do things in only one specific way, Ruby gives you the freedom to make your own choices. Avi stressed this pretty clearly. It's about choices. It's about freedom. Amen, brother.

After lecture, we spent the rest of the day on labs. Some were easy; some were not. By the end, my brain was fried and I could tell that my fellow students were also feeling the pain.

I left FS @7:50pm.

The work is challenging; the days are intense; but the hours fly by and I can't help but smile at the sheer amount I'm learning and how much fun I'm having.