---
layout: post
title:  "FS // Day 3 | Ruby Methods"
date:   2014-10-02 23:15:03
categories: flatironschool ruby
tags: regex, methods, scope, .push, .shift, <<, ddsger dijkstra, improv
---
### Biggest Problem of the Day (BPD): Blog Scheduler

Task: Create a queue of bloggers from a list of students.

This was a tough problem. This lab had quite a few specs that increased in difficulty. I actually did not complete this until Day 4 (after calling it quits late on Day 3). These were the rspecs:

{% highlight ruby %}
it "returns an array of groups"
it "sets group sizes to the size given"
it "creates the right number of groups"
it "uses every student in the list for a large enough number of groups"
it "attempts to randomize the list"
it "uses some studens more than once for a large enough number of groups"
it "doesn't repeat students on adjacent days"
{% endhighlight %}

The first 3, no problem, but it was the 4th one, "it "uses every student in the list for a large enough number of groups" do", that caused problems for a large majority of students. At first, I tried creating an empty `student_group` array and then populating that from the `students` list and modding (`%`) by the `group_size`. Something like this:

{% highlight ruby %}
def create_groups(students, group_size, num_groups)
  student_group = []
  counter = 0
  student_group << students[counter...(counter + group_size % num_groups)]
  counter += group_size
end 
{% endhighlight %}

This didn't work (reasons still unkwown). It simply kept returning me an array that did not include all students. I discussed the lab with other students and we all tried modulus... but it just wasn't working. I left around 10pm to get some rest and start fresh the next day.

The next morning, I came in and chatted with Molly and she suggested I try a different strategy. Why not shift students into the `student_group` array and then push that group back into `students` (so not to run out of students)? Genius.

I scrapped my code and put this together.

{% highlight ruby %}
def create_groups(students, group_size, num_groups)
  shuffled_students = students.shuffle
  student_groups = []
  while student_groups.length < num_groups          
    unit_group = shuffled_students.shift(group_size)
    student_groups << unit_group
    shuffled_students += unit_group
  end
  student_groups
end
{% endhighlight %}

Success! However, a big takeway I learned was that `<<` does not do the same thing as `+`. At first, I was getting errors because `<<` kept adding arrays into `student_groups` when I thought I was adding the individual elements. To solve, I used `+=` but could have also used `unit_group.flatten`

### Rest of the day
Today's lecture discussed [Edsger W. Dijkstra](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edsger_W._Dijkstra), inventor of Structured Programming, along with loops, primitives, scopes, regexps, and methods.

Today was not like the past few days. It was like the floodgates of labs flung open and we had to struggle not to drown in them. Avi said they would be giving us more work than we could handle and he wasn't kidding. 

### Fun part of the day: 
After lecture, we did Improv. Someone who specializes in teaching Improv to engineers came in and got the entire class to participate in some fun(ny) activities. Ultimately, the exercises (and lessons) revolved around being positive, focusing on the "Yes And" mentality, establishing confidence, and dealing with change.

Left @9:50pm.
