---
layout: post
title:  "FS // Day 22 | Rails"
date:   2014-10-29 11:00:30
categories: flatironschool ruby rails
tags: ruby, rails, dhh
---

### Programmer of the Day: [David Heinemeier Hansson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Heinemeier_Hansson) aka DHH
 
* Creator of the Ruby on Rails framework
* Co-founder/CTO of Basecamp (fka 37signals)
* Professional racecar driver
* 2-time NYT Best-selling author
* Straight up boss

**update**: on 11/5/14 we interviewed DHH! Great guy and overall very likeable. The first question asked was, "How are racing and building Rails alike?" (answer: Flow). The biggest takeaways were that he loved Ruby the day he found it; that flow is critical; and that building Rails has always been about innovation.

### Ruby on Rails (RoR)

[Ruby on Rails](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruby_on_Rails) is an open-source framework for developing web applications. To quote: "Rails is a full-stack framework that emphasizes the use of well-known software engineering patterns and paradigms, including convention over configuration (CoC), don't repeat yourself (DRY), the active record pattern, and model–view–controller (MVC)".

Rails has survived for 10 years and is still innovating. In the world of web, 10 years is a lifetime and the fact that it is still so widely used puts it in the top 1% of all frameworks. Major upgrades to the framework have not always been backwards compatible and *that* is what keeps Rails relevant.

What I find interesting and humorous is that people complain whenever a major upgrade occurs.Technology has always been about change; about introducing new concepts and practices that challenge the old ways of doing things. It's about efficiency and optimizations, and when DHH and the core team do a major upgrade, that's essentially what they're doing - even when it means breaking its old self. 

Given that we just learned Sinatra, here are some of the major differences:

### Rails vs. Sinatra

* Routing is a DSL separate from controllers
  * mapping URL to particular part of application
  * get ‘products/:id’, :controller => :products, :action => “show”
  * get ‘products’ => ‘products#index'
* Controller actions are Ruby methods, no DSL
  * show
  * index
  * edit
  * new
  * update
  * create
  * destroy
* Explicit and implicit view rendering
  * render ‘show'
* ActionView
  * forms made easier!
* The Asset Pipeline
  * Putting all CSS & JS into a specific directory that represent different purposes
  * app - JS built specifically for the app
  * lib - JS built generally, can be used for other purposes or apps
  * vendor - JS libraries built by others (e.g. jQuery)
* Generators:
   * Scaffold => Everything for CRUD a resource
   * Resource => Everything for YOU to *program* CRUD for a resource
   * Controller + view
   * Model => a model (with migration)
   * migration => just a migration

Rails is a behemoth of a framework and offers a ton of functionality. I can already tell there is so much to learn and I'm excited to work with it. My first thought is to migrate my app NextStep from Sinatra to Rails and to implement those "next steps" (e.g. persistence) with it.


