---
layout: post
title:  "FS // Day 11 | SQL"
date:   2014-10-14 11:30:30
categories: flatironschool sql
tags: ruby, sql, edgar codd, databases, appnexus
---

Today we learned about SQL. I don't have a fun program of the day but I'm happy to show off a former student's project - [MISSQL Command](http://missqlcommand.com/) - which is a really cool SQL tutorial (also a REPL, I think?).

#### Programmer of the Day: [Edgar Codd](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edgar_F._Codd) - invented relational databases.

We used to operate on a hierarchal data model and Cobb flipped that theory on its head by introducing relational databases. By using unique IDs to relate data from one table to another, it was now easier to update data in one table and have that reflect in every other table that referred to it. Although, Avi said technology is cyclical and databses like MongoDB seem to be using the old hierarchal style.
 
This brought me back to my short stint on the BlackOps team at AppNexus. I remember doing *a lot* of SQL. For a week, there was a bug that caused a handful of clients to pay for clicks and acquisitions that didn't actually occur due to misfired pixels on a specific site. My psuedo manager at the time gave me the task of calculating how much the clients spent and how much we should refund them (she did the math already, she just wanted to see if I could do it). This was not trivial. One, I had never done a cost-analysis. Two, I had never used SQL before. But at the end of a week, I was able to put together a decent query string, join multiple tables, and calculate the loss on over 60K campaigns within a 7 day timeframe. All while I was still working my full-time job.

Looking back, one thing that really pains me is that I did not know how to automate anything. That meant I had to do a lot of things manually and it was just awful. If only I had known how to build a Ruby program that could execute SQL and output that data into an excel file or even just do the calculation within the program itself... oh god, I don't even want to think about it anymore.

Anyhow! Ruby is awesome and can call SQL commands via the sqlite3 gem. Here's some code we did in lecture:

{% highlight sql %}

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS people (
     id     INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
     name   TEXT
);

INSERT INTO people (name) VALUES (“Gladwell”), (“Godin”), (“Ferriss”);
{% endhighlight %}

Then you:

`sqlite3 blog-engine.db < create_posts.sql`

But here's something cool you can do with Ruby:

{% highlight ruby %}
require ‘sqlite3’
db = SQLite3: Database.new “test.db”    # same as sqlite3 test.db on cmd line
result = db.execute (“SELECT * FROM people”)
result = db.execute (“SELECT * FROM people WHERE name LIKE ‘G%’”).last[1]
{% endhighlight %}

Another cool thing is SQL sanitation. Like 

{% highlight ruby %}
author_name = gets.strip
author_query = “SELECT ... = ?"
results = db.execute(author_query, author_name)
{% endhighlight %} 

This will escape any user inputted SQL string to prevent hacks like SQL injections which can be a terrible thing! See [Exhibit A](http://xkcd.com/327/). Joking aside, security is another interesting topic that I'd like to learn more about in the future. Way down the road though.

